Prerequisites and Tools

Ready to take all your HTML, CSS and JavaScript knowledge and focus it on building an interactive, dynamic one-page app right in the browser? Us too.

Don’t worry, we’re not going to implement just any old toy application, some boring payroll example, or some other less-than-exciting project. No, we’re going to implement something truly interesting—The Game of Life. What is The Game of Life? We’ll give you the full run down on that, but before we do, let’s first talk about what you need to complete this project.

First up: HTML and CSS. Now, we don’t use a lot of HTML and CSS but you should know the basics. If you’re in need of a quick review, focus on how to use ids and classes (in HTML and for selecting in CSS), how to build a table, and generally how the Document Object Model (the DOM) works.

You’ll also need to understand the fundamentals of JavaScript programming; we’ll be using functions, loops, arrays, and, because this is a web app, we’ll also be manipulating the DOM and handling events using JavaScript code. If you’ve read an introductory JavaScript book, you’ll be prepared; of course, we’re partial to Head First JavaScript Programming, and if you’ve read Chapters One through Ten, you’ll be in great shape to take on The Game of Life.

Tools
So what tools do you need to complete this project? Simple: one or more modern browsers (the latest version of Chrome, Firefox, Safari, or Edge will do just fine) and any code or plain text editor. On this latter point we’re agnostic: if you love IntelliJ, good for you. If a stripped down text editor or vi is your thing? More power to you. Just make sure whatever editor you use is either designed specifically for HTML, CSS and JavaScript programming, or is in “plain text” mode (that means, don’t use Microsoft Word!).

What about source code?
You can download all the completed code for this project from github. We'll be including the code for each step with each coding lesson. However, resist the urge to just download all the code right up front. By writing the code yourself as you progress through the project, the concepts will sink in more deeply and you’ll build better mental muscle memory. We’ll also be prompting you to try to figure some of it out on your own, which will help the concepts sink in even further. If you get stuck, first try the community, then as a last resort fall back on the source code.

With that out of the way, let’s get warmed up with a little exercise in the next lesson.